David Schaich (he): Let's start
David Schaich (he): getting the tutorial for this week underway.
David Schaich (he): On Thursday morning,
David Schaich (he): sixteenth of March, the magic number for today is
David Schaich (he): 5, 0,
David Schaich (he): 3, 9, 3, 4.
David Schaich (he): And the plan for today is to set aside the
David Schaich (he): new material we saw on Tuesday about the grand-canonical ensemble and
David Schaich (he): step back for a
David Schaich (he): quick wrap-up of the two topics we've been looking at --- the two applications we focused on
David Schaich (he): in the context of the canonical ensemble --- the
David Schaich (he): mixing of ideal gases in this
David Schaich (he): activity that was introduced last week, as well as a new activity on thermodynamical cycles going beyond the Carnot cycle from 200 years ago
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): looking at some cycles with a bit more
David Schaich (he): relevance to our everyday life in the twenty-first century. In particular cycles that avoid slow
David Schaich (he): isothermal stages that take too long to carry out in practical engines. But before this is opportunity to
David Schaich (he): ask any questions about
David Schaich (he): any topic of the module things we've looked at and aren't clear What things, were you? Yeah, I looked at that seem related to.
David Schaich (he): and maybe not
David Schaich (he): ask the question of my over while you consider if you have any of yours. which is
David Schaich (he): how much details you you want to see about
David Schaich (he): rapidly through this mixing entropy calculation that was introduced last week in particular. Do any of you want to shout out the
David Schaich (he): results they've got for the mixing entropy in this slightly simplified case, where
David Schaich (he): all the particles are indistinguishable except for
David Schaich (he): one, that property, red versus new color that allows 2 sets of particles to be distinguished, one set from the other
David Schaich (he): bones here a result for the mixing entropy in this particular case from the where we looked at so indistinguishable fully
David Schaich (he): in the lecture. You know I have an intermediate case, and maybe
David Schaich (he): it might be worthwhile, for
David Schaich (he): we need to show it alternative way of carrying out the computation of that mixing entropy that differs from what we went through
David Schaich (he): in class.
David Schaich (he): So in particular from the class we would. The procedure will be introduced in classes to start, as always, with the
David Schaich (he): partition function that contains the full information about all of the microstates.
David Schaich (he): all of it
David Schaich (he): our system
David Schaich (he): right, that here, so
David Schaich (he): we have it just 2 factors of whatever n factorial and 2 and actors. all of it
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): particles in that in Volume 2 V. With the usual thermodynamic wavelength. That accounts for the part of those mass and temperature.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): we have relations between the entropy and the hell, all free energy coming from the logarithm of this partition function.
David Schaich (he): there is a trick that yes, it is
David Schaich (he): suggested in the activity.
David Schaich (he): And it
David Schaich (he): it any of you take this route as it goes to but one that we're 3, 4, one, that we went through in the lecture.
David Schaich (he): shaking heads so
useful to
David Schaich (he): consider what we have in terms of so mixing entropy is the difference between interview that combined system minus the entropy, that we started off with the initial system
David Schaich (he): before the random group particles are about to mix. And, as I was saying. each of those entropies is the derivative with respect to temperature of the
David Schaich (he): free energy. And that's right. The negative, helpful, free energy, which is the positive temperature times, the log of the corresponding partition function.
David Schaich (he): So the difference between logs and partition functions in a derivative
David Schaich (he): and property of
David Schaich (he): it's a. Of the ratio of partition functions
David Schaich (he): which is useful because in that ratio. There can be many cancellations.
David Schaich (he): So in particular email mixing. And for video
David Schaich (he): here, the one, the expression we have, we can find proficient function just from the activity
David Schaich (he): we can actually carry out. This derivative.
Temperature is once we just get the
David Schaich (he): what was the partition function ratio?
David Schaich (he): We have temperature times
David Schaich (he): of that ratio.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Given the
David Schaich (he): partition function for 2 separate gases of
David Schaich (he): particles that are indistinguishable on either side of that wall in the initial state. you know that
David Schaich (he): I can write this ratio. is It's repeating it.
David Schaich (he): We add to the left while we're in that
David Schaich (he): to be over lamb, the queue, and get to the 2 end. We have 2
David Schaich (he): guesses in the
David Schaich (he): each with and particles. So that's the partition function that we get for each one. They multiply because they are independent.
David Schaich (he): and everything
David Schaich (he): cancels off. Once you distribute that square, except for the
David Schaich (he): factor of to in the numerator. 2 to 2,
David Schaich (he): which is
David Schaich (he): second term, drops out immediately.
David Schaich (he): and the mixing entropy we immediately have It's the logarithm of this ratio to n more 2.
David Schaich (he): Of course, this is also what we can hit by computing that video.
David Schaich (he): almost free energy, and this derivative starting from that combined efficient function.
David Schaich (he): It's just
David Schaich (he): the cover way of organizing things that carries out cancellations prior to
David Schaich (he): taking derivatives rather than by going through the full process and observing the cancellations monthly and products. One other thing we can note is that
David Schaich (he): this 2 and log 2 with the 2 N.
David Schaich (he): 4 particles that we have
David Schaich (he): is actually the same mixing entropy as we had
David Schaich (he): in the case of fully distinguishable particles.
David Schaich (he): So this mixing entropy is the same mixing entropy that we. when we had more than just a color to tell particles that we can actually label every individual particle and keep track of them.
David Schaich (he): So in this case there is less information
David Schaich (he): about each particle that we can know in principle. But when we mix particles, even if we have 2 sets of otherwise
David Schaich (he): indistinguishable particles that different only by this single property. The increase in the entropy that we get from that mix in
David Schaich (he): is the same
David Schaich (he): as if we could label it all.
David Schaich (he): So this is something that is.
David Schaich (he): i'm not obvious, is not something I can really make a.
David Schaich (he): and she would have the conceptual physical argument, for it's something that is coming out of the mathematics and telling this
David Schaich (he): something very deep and not obvious about properties all the way physical systems. and how their information content
David Schaich (he): plays a role
David Schaich (he): as they all in time.
David Schaich (he): So that was the first task from the activity introduced
David Schaich (he): last week to be carried out over the the past week. and the second activity was actually the
David Schaich (he): the fun part that was looking at
David Schaich (he): this final state where the wall is reinserted in this
David Schaich (he): system. To separate
David Schaich (he): the guess is back into 2 separate subsystems.
David Schaich (he): We are now, thanks to
David Schaich (he): the mixing stage, we have residues on either side, and we want to check to make sure that the second wall of through dynamics
David Schaich (he): is obeyed, and the entropy continues to increase as we re insert
David Schaich (he): this wall
David Schaich (he): something that we. our view, is the case
David Schaich (he): in the lecture for fully disable particles.
David Schaich (he): What's left? This left for this tutorial activity
in order to actually
David Schaich (he): carry out the calculation
David Schaich (he): that things do work out
David Schaich (he): So it's. I'm assuming that if you
David Schaich (he): we're eager to volunteer the mixing entropy and that
David Schaich (he): sort of fits on these 2 lines. It's also worth going through the computation of the final entropy to make sure that
David Schaich (he): you get the feedback on how that should turn out, and some of the people
David Schaich (he): features being counter along the way.
Now, seeing
David Schaich (he): I mean you disagree with that plan. All try to keep an eye on the clock talk too long, and have enough time to
David Schaich (he): give you a new activity for the coming week.
David Schaich (he): Not a real
David Schaich (he): those that
David Schaich (he): this trick we have developed of relating the differences of interviews to
David Schaich (he): the ratio of partition functions also helps to simplify
David Schaich (he): the computation of that final entropy which we can
David Schaich (he): perfectly rewrite as
David Schaich (he): the final entropy, minus the combined entropy, plus the combined entropy just scanning is attracting the same quantity
David Schaich (he): which from our work above is the up, the whole of the ratio motion divided by in my
David Schaich (he): plus
David Schaich (he): the entropy we have in the combined system.
David Schaich (he): So we need to break down. I would have to be that
David Schaich (he): partition function for this final system, where
David Schaich (he): and we'll be
David Schaich (he): as we looked at in the previous tutorial with balance of the entropy is to assume up to sort of longer than the corrections
David Schaich (he): that are negligible. When we have a large number of particles.
David Schaich (he): it's safe to assume that the number of particles
David Schaich (he): end up on inside of that we inserted wall just by
David Schaich (he): the fact that the number of microstates with that even division
David Schaich (he): his followers to the any other possibilities.
David Schaich (he): So there are 2 and total particles, and we we assume, and are on each side of the wall.
David Schaich (he): So it on the left side
David Schaich (he): we have new
David Schaich (he): red particles. then we must necessarily have. and minus new blue particles on the left.
David Schaich (he): the remaining and minus new red and new blue also have to be on the right.
David Schaich (he): and the final partition function sums over
David Schaich (he): all the possible values of new. We can have none of the particles on the left being read, all of them on the right.
Our entropy balance is expected to be unlikely.
David Schaich (he): or we can have all in red particles, new equals, and on the left it is equally unlikely compared to hey you
David Schaich (he): or mixed distribution.
David Schaich (he): The partition function is a new that
David Schaich (he): corresponds to this particular. we get the particles you can right, and as
David Schaich (he): a one over 2 factorial V over
David Schaich (he): to you. That's the new red particles on the left we have the and minus new blue particles. the same
David Schaich (he): different number of particles. and then on the right we have the same numbers of new. And so this
David Schaich (he): full product. Just get squared of one factor for the left system and one for the right.
David Schaich (he): So we can
David Schaich (he): do a bit of cancellation.
David Schaich (he): So that's new independent after
David Schaich (he): a volume over Lambda, cubed to the 2 N.
David Schaich (he): And then the for new and goals. one over
David Schaich (he): 2 factors of your
David Schaich (he): factorial.
David Schaich (he): which we can
David Schaich (he): recognize as the binomial, coefficient, and she's new squared. divided through by the overall factorial
David Schaich (he): So partition function itself.
David Schaich (he): Then the
David Schaich (he): overall factor of one over
David Schaich (he): and occupy the volume. and some overdue just includes that's squared and binomial coefficients. which
David Schaich (he): is a this. Some of the binomial coefficients squared, is known as a binomial cell in the hypertometric functions, all sorts of from self.
David Schaich (he): It's also a special case of this
David Schaich (he): vendor Volume got credit for by publishing it at some point in the 17 hundreds. It was some time later we go on to that Chinese mathematician, if you and
David Schaich (he): discovered it
David Schaich (he): something like tough 400 to 500 years before
David Schaich (he): as that knowledge trickled through eventually to Europe. Hey! Move It's some historical recognition. But this sum over the square 5 of the coefficients is just
David Schaich (he): a single one on your coefficients
David Schaich (he): 2 in she was in. So we have
David Schaich (he): this compact expression
David Schaich (he): for the final partition function.
David Schaich (he): Once the wall has been reinserted and
David Schaich (he): the particles are we divided within on
David Schaich (he): good size?
David Schaich (he): So all we have to do to get the entropy is now divided. This partition function by
David Schaich (he): yeah combined one that we looked at earlier.
David Schaich (he): She is written up for the top of the page.
David Schaich (he): so the one over n
David Schaich (he): factorial square terms cancel out.
David Schaich (he): The Lamb is cancel out. Volume cancels out. All that does not cancel out is
factor of 2.
David Schaich (he): We have the to.
David Schaich (he): and then the
David Schaich (he): prohibitions that we have
David Schaich (he): now in the final state from something over all of the possible distributions of regular particles. So that is the same. and the denominator from the combined system.
David Schaich (he): binomial, coefficient, also independent of temperature. So the second term in the
David Schaich (he): entropy difference will cancel out
David Schaich (he): is the combined entropy, plus
David Schaich (he): the lord of that binomial coefficients.
David Schaich (he): 2 and and then
David Schaich (he): 2 end factors of the log of 2 with the negative sign, because that is now in the denominator.
David Schaich (he): So it is
David Schaich (he): also suggested in the activity we
David Schaich (he): make a real, safe assumption that it is very large. We
David Schaich (he): hit this results with certainly this formula, one neglected. We're going in terms. So what we have to do is
David Schaich (he): break up the
David Schaich (he): I know the coefficient into It's called I factorials.
We have the log of 2 and
David Schaich (he): factorial by n factorial and 2 and minus the number and factorial.
David Schaich (he): So the numerator log of 2 n factorial But Sterling is going to be 2 in 1, 2 and a minus 2 in and then
negative sign
David Schaich (he): problem. Having these other factors in the denominator, we have 2 of them.
David Schaich (he): and they are just a single end factorial. So in
David Schaich (he): my name is, and
David Schaich (he): you can see that the constant terms. minus 2 n minus 2 times minus n cancel all the and log in
David Schaich (he): terms cancel. All. All that is left is
David Schaich (he): hey?
David Schaich (he): 2 and 1, 2,
David Schaich (he): which looks familiar because it cancels off.
David Schaich (he): Video. we're meeting term coming from now.
David Schaich (he): our trick of adding is attracting that combined system interview. So
David Schaich (he): all of those cancel. The end result is that at this level of approximation from St. This formula. the final entropy you
David Schaich (he): is equal to the combined entropy, which is greater greater than the starting entropy.
David Schaich (he): And the second law
David Schaich (he): is very happy
David Schaich (he): with that.
David Schaich (he): So that is
David Schaich (he): where we can declare victory, at least
David Schaich (he): in the large, and in so called from a dynamic limit, where sterling this
David Schaich (he): formula
David Schaich (he): becomes a better and better approximation at this level.
David Schaich (he): If we
David Schaich (he): end up, including the logarithmic terms in this expansion, it's
David Schaich (he): through the one line calculation that okay verify
David Schaich (he): it gives us a final entropy
David Schaich (he): that is equal to the combined entropy
David Schaich (he): minus the wall rhythm of pie. i'm in
David Schaich (he): over to you. Actually
David Schaich (he): okay. square root.
David Schaich (he): which is less then yes, see
David Schaich (he): which should cause us to worry
David Schaich (he): the you.
David Schaich (he): Resolution to
David Schaich (he): the calculation at this
more stringent level approximation
David Schaich (he): is to add, in the very highly suppressed contributions from
David Schaich (he): the possibility that we have different numbers of particles, as well as different mixtures of red and blue
David Schaich (he): on each side of that final system.
David Schaich (he): What's the wall?
David Schaich (he): A logarithmic contribution
David Schaich (he): that keeps the second law of thermodynamics obeyed
David Schaich (he): and can be carried out in the same sort of way that we've gone through here. So go on
David Schaich (he): a bit too long about this All
David Schaich (he): how to see if everyone is happy with it.
David Schaich (he): That sort of results from
David Schaich (he): last week's mixing entropy, activity.
David Schaich (he): and I will. We move on to the next thing I you what to mention, as in the side, one
David Schaich (he): concept or an idea that you might have encountered before. Which is
it goes by the name of the Max
David Schaich (he): a
David Schaich (he): called Experiment, that James with Maxwell
David Schaich (he): came up with mid 18 hundreds.
1,867.
David Schaich (he): So, carrying out these considerations even before the concept of thermodynamic ensemble had been.
David Schaich (he): will be formalized mathematically. People realize that empirically
David Schaich (he): guesses would all would tend to mix into a disorder of states, and not unmix themselves into the other direction. So it would be unnatural
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): a mixed state like this final state to
David Schaich (he): turn into an initial state. We have that area of time that we've seen before Maxwell. Imagine well what it
David Schaich (he): we have some.
David Schaich (he): So what he called demon, which is a called. You can think of this as just some mechanical device that is able to choose what particles to let through.
David Schaich (he): of all dividing our usual 2 subsystems.
David Schaich (he): So in our case it this device sees a red particle, it doesn't move on to the left. If the device is a blue particle, that's it through on the right. and in that way they can reverse the early time
David Schaich (he): unmixed these gases, and in a lot of understanding, reduce the entropy and violate that second wall
David Schaich (he): of thermodynamics
David Schaich (he): In the illustration shown here, which is more in line with what actually was thinking rather than labeling particles as red. And we were talking about their entropy, which was a concept that wasn't
David Schaich (he): really in place at the time he introduced this idea he figured that this device might last
David Schaich (he): energetic, fast moving particles into the left hand system B of the slower moving blue, or the color particles going to the system a.
David Schaich (he): And this code introduce a spontaneous all temperature difference. We would have an unnatural heat flow from a cold system to a cost system
David Schaich (he): and generate Hey, You temperature on one side greater than the temperature out the other, which could then be put into a heat engine and use to to do work
David Schaich (he): so you can get work or power from nothing. The basic idea of the professional motion machine, the second wall of thermodynamics for this by saying.
David Schaich (he): Not only can't we win with thermodynamic cycles, we can't even break even.
David Schaich (he): and the basic
David Schaich (he): argument.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): in the context of Maxwell's email.
David Schaich (he): I would say conceptual arguments
David Schaich (he): that any device that accomplishes
David Schaich (he): this
David Schaich (he): stated goal of unmixing gases and putting particles with certain properties on one side. Those are other properties; on the other.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): activities of this demon or device have have their own interview cost.
David Schaich (he): So if we look at the
David Schaich (he): one system. oh.
David Schaich (he): the demon for the device interacting with these gases.
David Schaich (he): We also have to account for
David Schaich (he): the entropy, you
David Schaich (he): of the activities of this device itself.
David Schaich (he): which part of the whole and these activities themselves, and a certain amount of entropy as a result of whatever it needs to be done. In order to do this division, and lower the energy of the gases themselves.
David Schaich (he): So
that's
David Schaich (he): that leaves the second law.
David Schaich (he): Okay? And this conceptual argument has actually been
David Schaich (he): checked in
David Schaich (he): practice much more recently.
David Schaich (he): So our technological capabilities. So what
David Schaich (he): exceed those available in the 1860 S.
David Schaich (he): And there are actually quite a few examples of
they're called demon experience.
David Schaich (he): That's
David Schaich (he): uses these sorts of devices to carry out in the case of
David Schaich (he): this illustration, by
David Schaich (he): encouraging a particle to move to a state where it has more potential energy.
we use to do work.
David Schaich (he): So this is a conceptual illustration of experiments by the Japanese group.
David Schaich (he): It's all about Well, years ago published in 2,010,
David Schaich (he): so they are using lasers to
David Schaich (he): track particles in
David Schaich (he): such a way that when a particle fluctuates.
David Schaich (he): thanks with thermal energy to
David Schaich (he): a state with that higher potential energy, the laser is readjusted to
David Schaich (he): track that particle in that higher energy stage. This is repeated
David Schaich (he): over and over again, which causes that particle to effectively roll up a staircase any more potential energy that can then be used to do work.
David Schaich (he): And I said that registration aside.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Give you the understand from it. If you do a careful accounting out of what happens to the lasers that you have to manipulates in order to put these crafts into place.
David Schaich (he): This procedure adds entropy to universe through those
David Schaich (he): users themselves.
David Schaich (he): and the second law
David Schaich (he): is obeyed. And if you are curious about this. I've added to
David Schaich (he): the extra resources on me.
David Schaich (he): Can this module a relatively recent
David Schaich (he): article about it from the physics today. Magazine from
David Schaich (he): November 2011. So, about 15 months ago, the demons haunting thermodynamics
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): some experiments in their real realizations in modern day experiments.
David Schaich (he): So any questions about Maxwell's team in the second of all.
David Schaich (he): or entropy before we move on to the promise
David Schaich (he): through a dynamic cycle application that I saying we would do today. We have enough time to get back introduced in under way.
David Schaich (he): Good.
David Schaich (he): Let's move on to what the
David Schaich (he): new activity for you to play with over the coming week, which is to consider it the thermodynamic cycle defined by this
David Schaich (he): on the screen.
David Schaich (he): This is known as the Auto Cycle.
David Schaich (he): named after his his name Auto, and
David Schaich (he): differs in a few important ways from the Our No cycle that we looked at in the lecture. One thing it is a a great deal more recent
David Schaich (he): sort of introduced around the late nineteenth or early twentieth century. and its main role is actually as a model of
David Schaich (he): an ideal, a realization of how petrol engines so internal combustion engines. What
David Schaich (he): So the idea is if we start at like one in this Pv diagram.
David Schaich (he): we carrying out some compression of our gas.
David Schaich (he): That is
David Schaich (he): a real real process, and occurs pretty rapidly. If you think about How many times per minute do you internal combustion engine in there a call or a bus?
David Schaich (he): It goes through its cycle.
David Schaich (he): You can appreciate just how quickly this compression is being. This whole cycle is being carried out.
David Schaich (he): so that compression increases the pressure of
David Schaich (he): the gas as we've seen before idiotic procedures. and I should mention, before going any further, that the Yes
David Schaich (he): be considered in this cycle
David Schaich (he): is actually a
David Schaich (he): mixture of air
David Schaich (he): and vaporized control
David Schaich (he): it. Once the
David Schaich (he): volume is reduced to this V. 2 from the starting one. You're going to be one
David Schaich (he): at point 2.
David Schaich (he): A spark is introduced
David Schaich (he): to the system that he heights this mix of air and the petrol.
David Schaich (he): and it's very rapidly. does a large amount of heat into the gas essentially, instantaneously So here it is.
David Schaich (he): hey
David Schaich (he): addition of heat from the submission stage burning the petrol.
David Schaich (he): yes.
David Schaich (he): goes into the gas so quickly that the volume does not have any time to change.
David Schaich (he): and even though the
David Schaich (he): gas itself is perfect to introduce the seeds and raise the temperature.
David Schaich (he): which in turn raises the pressure from the We can't still model this and think about it as Keith, coming in from some external from a reservoir
David Schaich (he): just happening very quickly at a fixed volume over the next instance the volume is able to expand.
David Schaich (he): This drives the gears and the wheels on the car provide the power and work.
David Schaich (he): This is another. We have the process kind of Adiabatic expansion.
David Schaich (he): and then, finally, the hot broadcast is
David Schaich (he): produce. Exhaust is expelled from the system. and
David Schaich (he): an equal number of
David Schaich (he): fresh fuel particles. Another, a new mixture of
David Schaich (he): petrol is brought in to replace that burns exhaust which lowers the temperature of the system, closes the cycle and gets us back to that starting part of wall.
David Schaich (he): So video question if you will consider
David Schaich (he): we've given a
David Schaich (he): thermodynamic cycle
David Schaich (he): is, what is this efficiency? And in particular, how is that efficiency? Compare
David Schaich (he): to the efficiency of the Carnot cycle.
David Schaich (he): So that is
David Schaich (he): something for you to work out just in the start of the last 10 min. See? Make sure you can get under way. I'm around. If there are immediate questions that I can pull up instead of just handwritten, those the
David Schaich (he): activity itself also from
David Schaich (he): I can this site.
David Schaich (he): So there is the cycle, the description of those 4 phases. and
David Schaich (he): I forgot to mention this useful concept of compression ratio. The ratio of the 2 volume set up here is here. It's a larger volume on top, so that R. Is greater than one
David Schaich (he): which will appear in the efficiency of the auto cycle.
David Schaich (he): and you want to compute that and compare it to
David Schaich (he): the Carnot cycle. which we've already computed earlier this week. The efficiency it, a. C of the Carnot cycle is one minus the temperature ratio
David Schaich (he): at the coldest points. One versus the hottest points 3
David Schaich (he): so always between 0 and one, and turning off when
David Schaich (he): pull the top become the same temperature. So i'll pause the recording.
David Schaich (he): I need this to you for
David Schaich (he): okay, I'll just resume the recording for the last minute here to
David Schaich (he): questions or ambiguities about this
David Schaich (he): activity for the coming week.
David Schaich (he): Not seeing any objections or concerns, I
David Schaich (he): remotely
David Schaich (he): something that in the mission earlier in that perhaps should have, was the suggestion that I think came up in the lecture that a good place to start is to figure out which of these
David Schaich (he): cycles is actually contributing to
David Schaich (he): the efficiency which is doing work which requires for it to be done. I wish we was.
David Schaich (he): you know, like he's
David Schaich (he): into the system, and all the other
David Schaich (he): contributions are going to work or teach. and then you ignored it. The goal of computing this efficiency, which
David Schaich (he): check in all that it's time next week, just before we turn right. so
David Schaich (he): last call for it
David Schaich (he): questions as I'll shut things down and head off to
David Schaich (he): today's office hours.